in normal times a blog written by an
economist might not get that much
attention but our next presenters blog
called the marginal revolution is quite
popular and he writes a column for the
New York Times called the economic scene
here to explain the world to us in terms
of the Great Recession and Beyond is
Tyler Cowen
I was told to come here and tell you all
stories but what I'd like to do is
instead tell you why I'm suspicious of
stories why stories make me nervous and
in fact the more inspired a story makes
me feel very often the more nervous I
get so the best stories are often the
trickiest ones the good and bad things
about stories is there a kind of filter
they take a lot of information and they
leave some of it out and they keep some
of it in but the thing about this filter
it always leaves the same things in
you're always left with the same few
simple stories there's the old saying
just about every story can be summed up
as a stranger came to town there's a
book by christopher Booker he claims
there really - seven types of stories
there's monster rags-to-riches quest
voyage and return comedy tragedy rebirth
you don't have to agree with that list
exactly but the point is this if you
think in terms of stories you're telling
yourself the same things over and over
again there was a study done we asked
some people well people were asked to
describe their lives and when asked to
describe their lives what's interesting
is how few people said mess it's it's
probably the best answer I don't mean
that in a bad way
mess can be liberating mess can be
empowering mess can be a way of drawing
upon multiple strengths but what people
wanted to say was my life is a journey
51% wanted to turn his or her life into
a story 11% said my life is a battle
again that's a kind of story 8% said my
life is a novel 5% my life is a play I
don't think anyone said my life is a
reality TV show but again we're imposing
order on the mess that we observe and
it's taking the same patterns and the
thing is when something is in the form
of a story often we remember it when we
shouldn't so how many of you know this
worry about George Washington and the
cherry tree it's not obvious that's
exactly what happened the story of Paul
Revere it's not obvious that that's
exactly the way it happened so again we
should be suspicious of stories we're
biologically programmed to respond to
them they contain a lot of information
they have social power they connect us
to other people so they're like a kind
of candy that we're fed when we consume
political information when we read
novels when we read non-fiction books
we're really being fed stories
nonfiction is in a sense the new fiction
the book may happen to say true things
but again everything's taking the same
form of these stories so what are the
problems of relying too heavily on
stories you know you view your life like
this instead of the mess which it is or
it ought to be but more specifically I
think of a few major problems when we
think too much in terms of narrative
first narratives tend to be too simple
the point of a narrative is to strip it
away not just into 18 minutes but most
narratives you can present in a sentence
or two so when you strip away detail you
tend to tell stories in terms of good
versus evil whether it's a story about
your own life or a story about politics
now some things actually are good versus
evil we all know this right but I think
as a general rule we're too inclined to
tell the good versus evil story as a
simple rule of thumb just imagine every
time you're telling yourself a good
versus evil story
you're basically lowering your IQ by 10
points or more if you just adopt that as
a kind of inner mental habit it's in my
view one way to get a lot smarter pretty
quickly you don't have to read any books
just imagine yourself pressing a button
every time you tell the good versus evil
story and by pressing that button you're
lowering your IQ 10 points or more
another set of stories that are popular
if you know Oliver Stone movies or
Michael Moore movies you can't make a
movie and say it was all the big
accident no it has to be a conspiracy
people plotting together because in a
story a story is about intention a story
is not about spontaneous order or
complex human institutions which are the
product of human action but not of human
design no a story is about evil people
plotting together so when you hear
stories about plots or even stories
about good people plotting things
together just like when you're watching
movies this again is reason to be
suspicious
as a good rule of thumb if you're asking
when I hear a story when should I be
especially suspicious if you hear a
story and you think wow that would make
a great movie that's when you know the
reaction should pop in a bit more and
you should start thinking in terms of
how the whole thing maybe is a bit of a
mess another common story or storyline
the claim that we have to get tough
you'll hear this in so many contexts we
have to get tough with the banks we had
to get tough with the labor unions we
need to get tough with some other
country some foreign dictator someone
we're negotiating with now again the
point is not against getting tough
sometimes we should get tough that we
got tough with the Nazis was a good
thing but this is again a story we fall
back upon all too readily
all too quickly when we don't really
know why something happened we blame
someone and we say we need to get tough
with them as if it never occurred to
your predecessor this idea of getting
tough I view it usually as a kind of
mental laziness it's a simple story you
tell we need to get tough we needed to
get tough we will have to get tough
usually that's a kind of a warning
signal another kind of problem with
stories is you can only fit so many
stories into your mind at once or in the
course of a day or even over the course
of a lifetime so your stories are
serving too many purposes so for
instance just to get out of bed in the
morning you tell yourself the story that
your job is really important what you're
doing is really important and maybe it
is but I tell myself that story even
when it's not and you know what that
story works it gets me out of bed it's a
kind of self-deception
but the problem comes is when I need to
change that story the whole point of the
story is that I grab on to it and I hold
it and it gets me out of bed so when I'm
really doing something that is actually
just a waste of time in my mess of a
life I'm too tied into my story that got
me out of bed and ideally I ought to
have some very complex story map in my
mind you know with combinatorial and a
matrix of computation and the like but
that's not how stories work stories to
work have to be simple easily grasped
easily told to others easily remembered
so stories will serve dual and
conflicting purposes and very often they
will lead us astray I used to think I
was within the camp of economists I was
one of the good guys
and I was allied with other good guys
and we were fighting the ideas of the
bad guys I used to think that and
probably I was wrong maybe sometimes I'm
one of the good guys but on some issues
I finally realized hey I wasn't one of
the good guys
I'm not sure I was the bad guy in the
sense of having evil intent but it was
very hard for me to get away with that
story one interesting thing about you
know biases cognitive biases they're the
subject of so many books these days
there's the nudge book the sway book the
blink book like the one title book all
about the ways in which we screw up and
there are so many ways but what I find
interesting is that none of these books
identify what to me is the single
central most important way we screw up
and that is we tell ourselves too many
stories or we are too easily seduced by
stories and why don't these books tell
us that it's because the books
themselves are all about stories the
more these books you read you're
learning about some of your biases but
you're making other of your biases
essentially worse so the books
themselves are part of your cognitive
bias often people buy them like as a
kind of talisman like I've bought this
book I won't be predictably irrational
it's like people want to hear the worst
so psychologically they can prepare for
it or defend against it it's why there's
such a market for pessimism but to think
that by buying the book gets you
somewhere that's maybe the bigger
fallacy it's just like the evidence that
shows the most dangerous people are
those who've been taught some financial
literacy they're the ones who go out and
make the worst mistakes it's the people
who realize they don't know anything at
all that end up doing pretty well a
third problem with stories is that
Outsiders manipulate us using stories
and we all like to think advertising
only works on the other guy but of
course that's not how it is
advertising works on all of us so if
you're too attached to stories what will
happen is people selling products come
along and they will bundle their product
with a story you're like hey you're free
story and you end up buying the product
because the product and the story go
together and if you think about how
capitalism works there's a bias here
like let's consider two kinds of stories
about cars story a is buy this car and
you will have beautiful romantic
partners and a fascinating life there
are a lot of people who have a financial
incentive to promote that story but say
the alternative story is you don't
actually need a car as nice as your
income would indicate what you usually
do is look at what your peers do and
copy them and that's a good heuristic
for a lot of problems when it comes to
cars I mean just buy a Toyota
maybe Toyota has an incentive there but
even Toyota is making more money off the
luxury cars and less money off the
cheaper cars so if you think which set
of stories do you end up hearing you end
up hearing the glamor stories the
seductive stories and again I'm telling
you don't trust them they're people
using your love of stories basically to
manipulate you and pull back and say
what are the messages what are the
stories that no one has an incentive to
tell and start telling yourself those
and then see if any of your decisions
change that's one simple way you can
ever get out of the pattern of thinking
in terms of stories but you can improve
the extent to which you think in terms
of stories and make some better
decisions so if I'm thinking about this
talk I'm wondering of course what is it
you take away from this talk what story
do you take away from Tyler Cowen one
story might be like story of the quest
Tyler was a man on a quest Tyler came
here and he told us not to think so much
in terms of stories that would be a
story you could tell about this talk it
would fit a pretty well-known pattern
you might remember it you could tell it
to other people this weird guy came and
he said don't think in terms of stories
let me tell you what happened today and
you tell your story
another possibility is you might tell a
story of rebirth you might say I used to
think too much in terms of stories but
then I heard Tyler Cowen and now I think
less in terms of stories that too is a
narrative you will remember you can tell
to other people and again it may stick
you also could tell a story of deep
tragedy this guy Tyler Cowen came and he
told us not to think in terms of stories
but all he could do is tell us stories
about how other people think too much in
terms of stories so you know today which
is is it like quest rebirth tragedy or
maybe some combination of the three I'm
really not sure and again I'm not here
to tell you to burn your DVD player and
throw out your Tolstoy to think in terms
of stories is fundamentally human
there's a Gabrielle Garcia Marquez
memoir living in order to tell the tale
that we use memory and stories to make
sense of what we've done to give meaning
to our lives to establish connections
with other people none of this will go
away should go away or can go away but
again as an economist I'm thinking about
life on the margin the extra decision
should we think more in terms of stories
or less in terms of stories when we hear
stories should we be more suspicious and
what kind of stories should we be
suspicious of again I'm telling you it's
the stories very often that you like the
most that you find the most rewarding
the most inspiring the stories that
don't focus on opportunity cost or the
complex unintended consequences of human
action because that very often does not
make for a good story so often a story
is a story of triumph a story of
struggle there are opposing forces which
are either evil or ignorant there is a
person on a quest someone making a
voyage and a stranger coming to town and
those are your categories but don't let
them make you too happy so as an
alternative at the margin again no
burning of Tolstoy but just be like a
little more messy like if I actually had
to live those journeys and quests and
battles that would be so oppressive to
me it's like my goodness can't I just
have my life in it's messy ordinary I
hesitate to use the word glory but like
it's fun for me do I really have to
follow some kind of narrative can't I
just live so be more comfortable with
messy be more comfortable with agnostic
and I mean this about the things that
make you feel good it's so easy to pick
out a few areas to be agnostic in and
then feel good about like I'm agnostic
about you know religion or politics and
then it's a kind of portfolio move you
make to be more dogmatic elsewhere right
sometimes the most intellectually
trustworthy people are the ones who pick
one area and they're totally dogmatic in
that like so pigheaded ly unreasonable
you think how can they possibly believe
that but it like soaks up their
stubbornness and then on other things
they can be pretty open-minded so don't
fall into the trap of thinking because
you're agnostic on some things that
you're being fundamentally reasonable
about your self-deception and your
stories and your open-mindedness so this
idea like of hovering epistemological
hovering and messiness and
incompleteness and not everything ties
up into a neat bow and you're really not
on a journey here you're here for some
messy reason or reasons and maybe like
you don't know what it is and maybe I
don't know what it is but anyway I'm
happy to be invited and thank you all
for listening
[Applause]